input/content/about.md, before:

title = "About"
kind = "page"
---
I'm Robin, and I currently live in Tokyo, Japan. In the past I have also lived in Amsterdam and London, which are both amazing cities in their own rights. I was born and raised in Germany, and will always consider myself [a European](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_World_of_Yesterday).

I enjoy challenging myself and growing continuously. I enjoy rock climbing, hiking, camping, and endurance running. In contrast to that, considerable amounts of my youth have been spent either in Azeroth or Faerûn.

I have been a software engineer for over a decade, and a staff+ engineer for about half that time. My specialties are technical planning and organisation, and I have a soft spot for distributed systems. I have been fortunate enough to work on several projects that involved unique challenges:

- [CircleCI](https://circleci.com)
- [F1TV](https://f1tv.formula1.com)
- [Komoju](https://komoju.com)
- [BBC Player](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BBC_Player) (not to be confused with BBC iPlayer)

## Contact

Feel free to contact me [via email](mailto:blog@sulami.xyz) if you like what I write, do not like what I write, or just want to chat. I'm notoriously bad at responding in a timely manner, consider yourself warned. I also have [a PGP public key](/pubkey.txt) if that tickles your fancy.

If you are intersted in me in a profesional capacity, I am on [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/robin-schroer/).

## This Website

This website is a static website generated by a custom static site generator I wrote to finally gain full control over my online presence. Turns out it is not that difficult to write one. Of course the [source is available](https://github.com/sulami/blog).

Prior versions of this website have been generated by [Emacs](https://orgmode.org/manual/Publishing.html), [Hakyll](https://jaspervdj.be/hakyll/), and [Pelican](https://getpelican.com/) (in reverse chronological order).

Commit message:

Add a content note to the about page

input/content/about.md, after:

title = "About"
kind = "page"
---
I'm Robin, and I currently live in Tokyo, Japan. In the past I have also lived in Amsterdam and London, which are both amazing cities in their own rights. I was born and raised in Germany, and will always consider myself [a European](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_World_of_Yesterday).

I enjoy challenging myself and growing continuously. I enjoy rock climbing, hiking, camping, and endurance running. In contrast to that, considerable amounts of my youth have been spent either in Azeroth or Faerûn.

I have been a software engineer for over a decade, and a staff+ engineer for about half that time. My specialties are technical planning and organisation, and I have a soft spot for distributed systems. I have been fortunate enough to work on several projects that involved unique challenges:

- [CircleCI](https://circleci.com)
- [F1TV](https://f1tv.formula1.com)
- [Komoju](https://komoju.com)
- [BBC Player](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BBC_Player) (not to be confused with BBC iPlayer)

## Contact

Feel free to contact me [via email](mailto:blog@sulami.xyz) if you like what I write, do not like what I write, or just want to chat. I'm notoriously bad at responding in a timely manner, consider yourself warned. I also have [a PGP public key](/pubkey.txt) if that tickles your fancy.

If you are intersted in me in a profesional capacity, I am on [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/robin-schroer/).

## This Website

This website is a static website generated by a custom static site generator I wrote to finally gain full control over my online presence. Turns out it is not that difficult to write one. Of course the [source is available](https://github.com/sulami/blog).

All content is produced by myself unless clearly marked otherwise. No generative tools have been used in the writing process.

Prior versions of this website have been generated by [Emacs](https://orgmode.org/manual/Publishing.html), [Hakyll](https://jaspervdj.be/hakyll/), and [Pelican](https://getpelican.com/) (in reverse chronological order).
