title = "In Praise of Boxes and Arrows"
timestamp = "2024-03-05"
tags = ["staff"]
---
One of my most versatile tools is also one of the simplest, a diagram I
generally call _boxes and arrows_. At its core it is a directed graph, boxes
connected by arrows. I started using these as a conscious practice after reading
the excellent _[Thinking in
Systems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thinking_In_Systems%3A_A_Primer)_. The
beauty of these diagrams is that they are quick to create, intuitive to
understand without explanation, and can be applied to many different problems.

My preferred tool for creating these diagrams is
[Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com/), because it is simple and can be used both
locally embedded in [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md), and collaboratively via
Excalidraw Plus, but there are many different options out there.[^1] Of course
the humble paper and pen remain a valid choice as well.

Most of my initial sketches are just bits of text connected by arrows, but for
sharing the diagrams with others, I often attach some metadata to both the text
and arrows in the form of different shaped boxes or colours. Additionally,
sometimes it makes sense to organise the graph so that similar boxes can be
grouped together. For example, when I make plans that have multi-pronged
approaches to solving a problem, such as technical solutions in tandem with
process changes, I will group the different measures together both by location
and colour.

Boxes and arrows can be used to describe technical architecture similar to [UML
diagrams](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unified_Modeling_Language#Diagrams),
both like a map of components with arrows describing communication, but also in
a sequence-diagram fashion with arrows describing the flow of information
throughout the lifecycle of some event. Both of these are also quite useful in
technical interviews, and I believe this to be common practice in architecture
interviews, common enough at least that [this
skit](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y8OnoxKotPQ) exists.

Perhaps less common is to use them for planning, starting at goals and working
backwards through dependencies until one arrives at actionable tasks. [Richard
Rumelt](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/11721966-good-strategy-bad-strategy)
uses an initial diagnosis of the current situation to inform guiding polices and
later coherent actions.[^2] Boxes and arrows can help both in crystallising the
diagnosis, as well as highlight potential policies and actions, by interrogating
the factors leading to the current circumstances.[^3]

This is where I see the real value in these diagrams, through the ability to
share them and thus create a shared understanding of directed graphs that is
otherwise difficult to express. It just so happens that directed graphs work
exceptionally well for cause-and-effect systems.

[^1]: Another reason I personally use Excalidraw is the fact that the inherently
    sloppy aesthetic means I don't spend too much time trying to align anything
    neatly.

[^2]: Will Larson actually has some excellent points on that
    [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vkfzpQ10eI4), for those struggling
    with the difference between policies and actions.

[^3]: This is similar to the [five
    whys](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Five_whys) technique, though I don't
    think anything is special about the number five. I think of it more like a
    small child, who likes to keep asking "why?" until they reach the limits of
    their parent's knowledge.
