title = "Lab Notebook 2024-06-19"
timestamp = "2024-06-19"
slug = "2024-06-19"
kind = "lab"
---

As mentioned last time, I've been brushing up on my calculus, working 
through [Quick Calculus][calc]. I just arrived in section 3/4, integral 
calculus. The introduction was a great opportunity to find out where I have 
gaps in my knowledge, especially in algebra. I also quite enjoy the 
self-study approach, it oddly reminds me of [The Little Schemer][scheme]. I 
do have to say that there are a few errors in the book, I found some missing 
symbols, and in one instance the solutions to a task are just missing. And 
while it does have a fundamentals/refresher section, sometimes the book 
implicitly requires background knowledge it never mentions. But overall I 
would recommend it nonetheless, it's definitely way faster paced than German 
high school maths. I'm expecting that I'll finish it up over the next week 
or two, the going has gotten somewhat slower as the topics get more advanced.

I also finished initial assembly of Grace, my hopper project. It's missing a 
mount for the flight computer as well as parts of the wiring harness, but 
everything else is on board now. Some tests on the initial design revealed 
that 10x4mm PLA members are not very rigid in torsion, leading to excessive 
vibrations of the rotor, more than I was comfortable with. I upgraded from a 
two-member to a four-member design, which is much more rigid.

I've been wondering if it would be worth it to try to assess structural 
strength of 3D-printed parts in simulation, given that right now I eyeball a 
lot of dimensions, which leads to situations like the above, but also a lot 
of waste mass. Given how specific thermoplastic printing is to the process 
and conditions, it's probably not worth it for one-off projects though. I 
know that strength varies a lot with print direction, but also the specific 
paths the print-head takes, where internal seams can develop into weak 
points. I especially noticed that last week when inspecting the 
disintegrated propeller, which had failed at one of those internal seams. If 
I was mass-producing, I would probably rely on a large amount of destructive 
testing to determine optimal part design.

Coming back to Grace, I've managed to perform the first tiny test-hop under 
its own power, which is a huge milestone. I was using external control via a 
wire, but confirmed that the vehicle has enough thrust to lift off at least 
within the area of the ground effect. With this out of the way, the next 
couple of weeks I will focus on firmware, not a lot of which is done yet. I 
have basic versions of throttle and servo control, which were used for the 
test hop, but nothing resembling an actual flight software. The first thing 
I'll try to get done is probably thrust vane calibration and setting up a 
simple PID controller feeding IMU data into the thrust vanes. Eventually I 
will have to get to tuning that controller, especially given that I don't 
think the vehicle is particularly crash-resistant, but that's still a while out.

After spending a few weeks in OnShape and listening to entire days of 3D 
prints, I'm actually quite happy to get back into a code editor.

[calc]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/61285811-quick-calculus
[scheme]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/548914.The_Little_Schemer
