title = "Lab Notebook 2024-07-09"
timestamp = "2024-07-09"
slug = "2024-07-09"
kind = "lab"
---

I've been somewhat busy over the last couple of weeks, but I've managed to 
work my way through _Quick Calculus_, even after hitting a bit of a wall 
towards the end of section three, where my previous knowledge stopped. I 
think it's quite a decent book, and I've gotten a more intuitive 
understanding of a lot of the concepts involved, especially the Taylor 
series. I do wish there were fewer errors in it though, I found at least 
half a dozen.

I also read through _A Philosopy of Software Design_ this week, which is a 
nice primer that for me supersedes _Elements of Clojure_ and perhaps 
_Pragmatic Programmer_. While I would've hoped for a bit more depth in some 
places, it's a nice reference to keep at hand during design and review, and 
to recommend to more junior folks.

I also just received a copy of _Control System Design_ by Friedland in the 
mail, which I'm hoping to dig into soon to refresh some of my understanding.

On the hardware side I haven't actually gotten a lot done, I've mostly 
reworked the servo section of my firmware, which now supports four servos on 
a single STM32 timer, as well as manual calibration for aligning zero 
positions.

While I'm missing some firmware, namely the GNC section, I already have 
large chunks of that in the old firmware which I should be able to pull over,
blockers for a proper test flight right now are:

1. A wiring harness for power distribution, I need to buy some connectors to 
   split up the 11.1V line coming from the battery to supply power to the 
   servos as well as the flight computer.
2. A solution to control altitude. I've been toying with the idea of using a 
   switch to detect loss of ground contact to just about hover, but maybe I 
   can get away with integrating the accelerometer. My main worry here is 
   that probably excessive vibrations will foil that approach, but it would 
   be the least effort option.

I'm also somewhat busy over the weekends in the near future, so I'll 
probably continue on weekday evenings, which will limit me to smaller time 
investments such as reading.
