pages/uses-this.md, before:

---
title: Robin Uses This
---

I really enjoy reading [uses this][usesthis] to get some ideas about what kind
of tooling other people use, and of course to borrow ideas, so I thought I'd do
my own version of this, and maybe help someone else. A lot of thought goes into
my tooling and workflow[^toomuch], so this is going to be quite elaborate. This
is also a page instead of a post, and I will try to keep it up to date, as my
setup keeps changing.

[^toomuch]: Arguably too much. Recently, I was close to buy an iPad Pro +
  Pencil, because I effectively wanted digital paper.

## Computer

My primary computer nowadays is a 2015 15" Macbook Pro, which is actually owned
by my employer, but I get to take it home, and do whatever I want with it, so I
use it as my only computer right now. The desktop workstation I had previously
I left behind in Germany. Sometimes I do miss the raw power of a Xeon with
effectively unlimited memory, but most of the time I prefer the mobility which
allows me to work from anywhere.[^wfh] MacOS is also very nice and tends to not
get into the way too much. I have always tried to only have one computer,
because I want to have all my things available everywhere, and keeping several
computers in sync is just supremely difficult.[^icloud]

[^wfh]: I do work regularly "from home", which sometimes is just a coffeeshop.
[^icloud]: Though iCloud allowing me to access my desktop from my phone is
  pretty neat.

At work I use a stand to bring the display up to eye-level, mostly because I
don't have an external display with sufficient pixel density to prevent
eye-strain when staring at code all day long. Because of this I use an Apple
Magic Keyboard and Magic Trackpad. At home I generally have just the laptop, as
I tend to sit on the couch or at the dinner table, and that is okay for shorter
periods of time.

The most precious software I have on my computer is probably
[BetterTouchTool][btt], which allows me to set up custom shortcuts and
gestures, and also modify all kinds of details about my input devices, which
Apple doesn't expose. My setup allows me to use my computer both with just the
keyboard or just the trackpad. I also have [1Password][1pw] on all of my
devices and synced via iCloud.

I write most of my code in [Spacemacs][spacemacs], which is an Emacs
distribution that basically emulates vim. It comes with mostly reasonable
defaults and provides a much better experience out of the box.[^config] Despite
that I also still use vim a fair bit, and my configuration mostly emulates
Spacemacs' behaviour.

[^config]: Which doesn't prevent me from having several hundred lines of
  bespoke configuration anyway.

When it comes to browsing, my work browser is currently [Firefox Developer
Edition][ffde], and my private browser is just Safari, because of iCloud
synchronisation.

## Phone

My phone is as of recently an iPhone 7 (non-Plus), which I am very happy with.
Under regular use it only requires charging every 2-3 days, and it is my
primary device when I'm out and about, mainly commuting or getting groceries. I
have a very simple and visually quiet matte black case on it, just because I
fear that scratches and dents are going to be really ugly with the
black[^space] finish. I currently use cheap Bluetooth headphones, which do the
job just fine. I do have the Lightning Earpods in my bag pack, just in case,
though.

[^space]: Sorry, "Space Grey".

The primary software on this is currently [2Do][2do], which is a
[GTD-style][gtd] task management app that controls large parts of my life. I
also use [Overcast][overcast] as my podcast client, and I'm listening to
podcasts basically whenever I'm out and not sitting down. While seated, I
usually read articles, which are held in [Instapaper][instapaper]. There is a
random assortment of other more or less useful apps on there, but nothing
really worth mentioning. I currently use Apple Notes to keep notes, and that
does the job.[^ocr]

[^ocr]: I'm actually quite excited about the fact that it does OCR on
  handwritten notes, and it's pretty good at that. One of the reasons I'm
  seriously considering the Pencil.

## Others

I also have an iPad Mini 3 (non-cellular), which acts mainly as a glorified
ebook-reader. It is my primary bed- and couch-device, and lives permanently at
home, unless I go out to read in a park.

I use iBooks to read ebooks, mainly because it works good enough[^mgmt] and
synchronises my reading position between my devices, as I sometimes read on my
phone when I'm on the tube. I also have both [Instapaper][instapaper] and
[Pocket][pocket] on there. I abuse Pocket as a shared dumping ground for things
I want to keep somewhere, and everything is tagged. It permanently holds a
backlog of YouTube videos to watch.

[^mgmt]: Though book management is a pain, especially compared to
  [Calibre][calibre], which I used before.

[usesthis]: https://usesthis.com
[btt]: https://www.boastr.net
[1pw]: https://1password.com
[spacemacs]: http://spacemacs.org
[ffde]: https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/developer/
[2do]: https://www.2doapp.com
[gtd]: http://gettingthingsdone.com
[overcast]: https://overcast.fm
[instapaper]: https://www.instapaper.com
[calibre]: https://calibre-ebook.com
[pocket]: https://getpocket.com

Commit message:

Add a note about colemak in uses this

pages/uses-this.md, after:

---
title: Robin Uses This
---

I really enjoy reading [uses this][usesthis] to get some ideas about what kind
of tooling other people use, and of course to borrow ideas, so I thought I'd do
my own version of this, and maybe help someone else. A lot of thought goes into
my tooling and workflow[^toomuch], so this is going to be quite elaborate. This
is also a page instead of a post, and I will try to keep it up to date, as my
setup keeps changing.

[^toomuch]: Arguably too much. Recently, I was close to buy an iPad Pro +
  Pencil, because I effectively wanted digital paper.

## Computer

My primary computer nowadays is a 2015 15" Macbook Pro, which is actually owned
by my employer, but I get to take it home, and do whatever I want with it, so I
use it as my only computer right now. The desktop workstation I had previously
I left behind in Germany. Sometimes I do miss the raw power of a Xeon with
effectively unlimited memory, but most of the time I prefer the mobility which
allows me to work from anywhere.[^wfh] MacOS is also very nice and tends to not
get into the way too much. I have always tried to only have one computer,
because I want to have all my things available everywhere, and keeping several
computers in sync is just supremely difficult.[^icloud]

[^wfh]: I do work regularly "from home", which sometimes is just a coffeeshop.
[^icloud]: Though iCloud allowing me to access my desktop from my phone is
  pretty neat.

At work I use a stand to bring the display up to eye-level, mostly because I
don't have an external display with sufficient pixel density to prevent
eye-strain when staring at code all day long. Because of this I use an Apple
Magic Keyboard and Magic Trackpad. At home I generally have just the laptop, as
I tend to sit on the couch or at the dinner table, and that is okay for shorter
periods of time.

I have been using the [Colemak keyboard layout][colemak] for several years on
all physical keyboards due to RSI issues, and also remap caps lock to control.

The most precious software I have on my computer is probably
[BetterTouchTool][btt], which allows me to set up custom shortcuts and
gestures, and also modify all kinds of details about my input devices, which
Apple doesn't expose. My setup allows me to use my computer both with just the
keyboard or just the trackpad. I also have [1Password][1pw] on all of my
devices and synced via iCloud.

I write most of my code in [Spacemacs][spacemacs], which is an Emacs
distribution that basically emulates vim. It comes with mostly reasonable
defaults and provides a much better experience out of the box.[^config] Despite
that I also still use vim a fair bit, and my configuration mostly emulates
Spacemacs' behaviour.

[^config]: Which doesn't prevent me from having several hundred lines of
  bespoke configuration anyway.

When it comes to browsing, my work browser is currently [Firefox Developer
Edition][ffde], and my private browser is just Safari, because of iCloud
synchronisation.

## Phone

My phone is as of recently an iPhone 7 (non-Plus), which I am very happy with.
Under regular use it only requires charging every 2-3 days, and it is my
primary device when I'm out and about, mainly commuting or getting groceries. I
have a very simple and visually quiet matte black case on it, just because I
fear that scratches and dents are going to be really ugly with the
black[^space] finish. I currently use cheap Bluetooth headphones, which do the
job just fine. I do have the Lightning Earpods in my bag pack, just in case,
though.

[^space]: Sorry, "Space Grey".

The primary software on this is currently [2Do][2do], which is a
[GTD-style][gtd] task management app that controls large parts of my life. I
also use [Overcast][overcast] as my podcast client, and I'm listening to
podcasts basically whenever I'm out and not sitting down. While seated, I
usually read articles, which are held in [Instapaper][instapaper]. There is a
random assortment of other more or less useful apps on there, but nothing
really worth mentioning. I currently use Apple Notes to keep notes, and that
does the job.[^ocr]

[^ocr]: I'm actually quite excited about the fact that it does OCR on
  handwritten notes, and it's pretty good at that. One of the reasons I'm
  seriously considering the Pencil.

## Others

I also have an iPad Mini 3 (non-cellular), which acts mainly as a glorified
ebook-reader. It is my primary bed- and couch-device, and lives permanently at
home, unless I go out to read in a park.

I use iBooks to read ebooks, mainly because it works good enough[^mgmt] and
synchronises my reading position between my devices, as I sometimes read on my
phone when I'm on the tube. I also have both [Instapaper][instapaper] and
[Pocket][pocket] on there. I abuse Pocket as a shared dumping ground for things
I want to keep somewhere, and everything is tagged. It permanently holds a
backlog of YouTube videos to watch.

[^mgmt]: Though book management is a pain, especially compared to
  [Calibre][calibre], which I used before.

[usesthis]: https://usesthis.com
[colemak]: https://colemak.com
[btt]: https://www.boastr.net
[1pw]: https://1password.com
[spacemacs]: http://spacemacs.org
[ffde]: https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/developer/
[2do]: https://www.2doapp.com
[gtd]: http://gettingthingsdone.com
[overcast]: https://overcast.fm
[instapaper]: https://www.instapaper.com
[calibre]: https://calibre-ebook.com
[pocket]: https://getpocket.com
