#+TITLE: Using Hoogle for Your Project
#+DATE: 2015-11-26

[[https://github.com/ndmitchell/hoogle][Hoogle]] is a fantastic tool
that uses Haskell's type system to build a searchable index of types,
functions and constants, connecting with
[[https://www.haskell.org/haddock/][Haddock]] to provide documentation.
It can be used to host browsable websites, like the
[[https://www.haskell.org/hoogle/][Hackage instance]] or the
[[http://www.stackage.org/lts-3.15/hoogle][Stackage instance]], or used
for editor integration, like in
[[https://github.com/Twinside/vim-hoogle][vim]] or
[[https://github.com/haskell/haskell-mode][emacs]]. Overall pretty great
stuff.

But if working on your own project that is not online anywhere yet,
setting up a local Hoogle instance is a bit tricky. But not anymore. I
wrote a relatively simple shell script that sets up a local instance
combining your project and the Stackage snapshot your project is using.
It currently is quite naive, and assumes you are using Linux, and
generally is a work in progress. But it works on my machineâ„¢, so I am
[[https://github.com/sulami/dotfiles/blob/master/scripts/hoogle.sh][releasing
it to the general public]] (the link is to the master branch of my
dotfiles, so it gets updated automatically).

Beware: There is no error checking whatsoever, so make sure you have
GHC, Stack, Haddock and Hoogle installed and in your =$PATH= (also curl
and awk). It might also eat all of your data. If you change your stack
resolver, you need to delete the Stackage Hoogle database yourself to
trigger a download of the right one, there is no version checking. Also
local documentation paths do not work when using =hoogle server=. Some
of this might get fixed in the future.
