---
title: Working Remotely (Part 1)
---

As of next week I will be full-time working remotely again, after having worked
on-site for almost two years now. This weekend I will be moving from London back
to what they call Europe or the continent here in London, specifically
Amsterdam.[^brexit] As I worked full-time remotely before, two years ago, I have
some experience and I want to lay out my ideas and plans to make this a
successful endeavour. Part two will be published in a few weeks and give an
update on how things are going once I settled in.

[^brexit]: Even though it does play a minor role, this is not directly due to
    Brexit and more a personal lifestyle choice.

## How This Came to Happen

As I mentioned above, I am moving for non-work related reasons, but part of me
is also looking forward to not having to commute or spending days inside an
open-plan office. Over the last couple of months I have transitioned to work
usually one day per week from home, so this is definitely a benefit in my book.
I also have to thank my current employer, [Ostmodern][ost], for being really
accommodating in this regard. When I approached them about moving countries, but
still wanting to stay with them, they were directly on board. We wrote up a
special agreement that states modifies my normal contract and defines the
parameters of our new employment relationship.

[ost]: https://ostmodern.co.uk

## Difficulties I Expect and Prevention Strategies

When I moved to London to work on-site, I did so not only because it was
significantly easier, at least at the time, to find a job on-site rather then
remotely, but also because I felt quite disconnected from my colleagues who I
only got to meet in person every couple of months. From time to time I would
also feel a bit lonely, working all by myself.

To circumvent these issues, we have agreed upon not only daily video
conferences, but also for me to come in once a month for two days to spend some
time with the rest of the team, have face-to-face meetings and catch ups and
just feel more involved. This should also help the rest of the team to not just
see me as an entity reachable via Slack or email.

In addition to that, I am actually not moving by myself, but I am taking a good
friend and my closest team member with me, so I will have someone physically
present most of the time to bounce ideas off.

Another problem I experienced before was having a hard time separating work and
private life, which can have negative impacts on both. The solution for these I
think is quite simple and obvious, I will rent a coworking space and
artificially commute there at least most of the time. This way I can focus on
getting work done while there and also leave work behind once I get home.
Because I get total freedom in this, I can still work from home if the weather
is terrible or I do not feel like going outside, and I get to pick the exact
length of commute I want.

Lastly I am foreseeing a new problem I have not faced in this way before, and
this is related to the fact that I now lead a small team and own several
products, one of them being our core backend platform. This makes me the central
entry point for a lot of people from other teams, and I am usually the person
invited to meetings where some platform knowledge is required. We decided that I
am going to keep both of these responsibilities, but we are going to install an
ambassador who is going to be working on-site and will be easier to talk to.
This ambassador is a fellow senior backend engineer who I will catch up with
regularly to make sure we are both on top of things.

## Where to Go from Here

I will be moving this upcoming weekend, as of time of posting, and resume
working as soon as possible next week. As mentioned in the beginning, there will
be a follow-up post in a couple of weeks, once the dust (and I) has settled,
where I will draw some conclusions on the predictions I made above and write
about what works and what does not.
