---
title: Working remotely (Part 2)
---

It has now been 48 days since the first part of this post, and 42 days since I
moved into my current flat in Amsterdam. Time for me to write the promised
follow-up and explain what has happened so far and how things have been going.

## The Good

First of all, I am a lot happier in my personal life, moving was definitely the
right decision for me in general, all work things aside. Having made the step
into a remote agreement frees me up to move when- and wherever I want, as my
employer does not care about from where I actually work at this point, apart
from timezone-related concerns.

I also think that full control over my workspace can drastically improve my
productivity, the main benefit being the lack of distractions.

Last time I mentioned that I would go back to London once a month. So far I am
keeping to this schedule, and my first visit has been quite pleasant, even if a
little stressful. But being able see my team members in person, catching up and
meeting new hires allows us to stay more in touch. My only minor complaint is
that travel is quite a hassle, especially at this rate, so I might try to turn
down the frequency a bit.

## The Bad

After the moving process, which included being legally homeless for a weekend in
France, I was quite happy to be able to stay home for a bit, so I ended up
working from my living room for a couple of weeks. In addition to that,
coworking spaces are (to me) surprisingly expensive for what they are.[^desk]
But after a while I started suffering from both cabin fever and loneliness, so I
bit the bullet and subscribed to one. This also ended up being the right
decision, because just the way I wrote the last time, I have a physical location
I can go to to work, but it is purely optional.

[^desk]: 200â‚¬/mo. for something they call "a desk" but in reality is just a slot
    at a table, electricity, wifi and access to a kitchen with free coffee is
    quite a lot in my opinion. If I wanted an actual desk and office chair,
    ideally with a set of walls around it, I can expect to pay at least twice
    that.

In addition to potential extra costs and stress due to more traveling, some
employers also seem to think that remote workers should by default earn less
than the ones coming into the office. It is true that remote work in and of
itself can be seen as a perk, but I also believe that correctly executed remote
work is beneficial to everyone involved.

## Closing Notes

If you want to go remote I recommend you do what I (we) did and get a remote
working agreement that is signed by you and your employer. It should capture the
terms of the remote work, such as work hours, visits, who pays for transport and
how long much in advance a warning needs to be given for you to be called into
the office.

The last point is quite important especially if you are expected to pay for
transport (and possibly lodging) which can be much more expensive if booked
spontaneously.
