#+TITLE: Staying Healthy as a Programmer
#+DATE: 2016-06-22

/Disclaimer/ In this post I link to some specific products. These links
serve as examples and are by no means direct reccomendations. Some of
these are just the result of a quick web search. If you decide to buy
stuff, do your research, figure out what exactly you need and choose a
product based on that.

One of the most important things in your life is your health. As
programmers, and other professionals who mainly work at a desk, staying
healthy can be surprisingly difficult, even though sitting all day seems
not particularly demanding. Some of this risks can be avoided by
consciously changing habits, but often the right equipment can also play
a big role. You really should not skimp when it comes to maintaining
your health. I will discuss some free, and also some non-free ways that
can help you with that.

* Repetitive Strain Injury
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: repetitive-strain-injury
   :END:

There are several big health risks that programmers are affected by. The
first one is
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Repetitive_strain_injury][repetitive
strain injury]], which can happen to anyone and can completely stop you
from coding if it gets too bad. The easiest way of preventing RSI is the
right setup. You want your desk to be at the right height, so your
elbows are at a right angle. Depending on the keyboard, a wrist rest can
also be helpful. As a rule of thumb, if your hands or arms start hurting
after several minutes of continuous typing, there's something wrong.

No matter what you do, doing things as unnatural as typing for long
periods of time is harmful to your body, like almost anything. So make
sure to take regular breaks, and also do some
[[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nmwqBMLVsjE][stretches]] for your
hands and arms.

You can also try using alternative keyboard layouts, although this is
quite a big step. I switched to using [[https://colemak.com/][colemak]],
which is still relatively close to QWERTY, on all my machines early this
year, and it has helped me tremendously, but it also took me about 10
weeks using it full-time to get back to my own typing speed, and regain
muscle memory for vim. Another popular alternative is
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dvorak_Simplified_Keyboard][dvorak]],
which is more widely supported (read: on Windows without extra
software), but radically differs from QWERTY.

If you want to go all out, there are also
[[https://www.amazon.com/Microsoft-Natural-Ergonomic-Keyboard-4000/dp/B000A6PPOK/][various]]
[[https://ultimatehackingkeyboard.com/][kinds]]
[[https://www.kinesis-ergo.com/shop/freestyle2-for-pc-us/][of]]
[[https://ergodox-ez.com/collections/keyboards/products/ergodox-ez-keyboard][ergonomical]]
[[http://matias.ca/ergopro/pc/][keyboards]], which some people swear by.
I haven't had any personal experience with these, but I feel like being
able to e.g. have your hands wider apart can make a big difference in
your wrists, especially if you are typing for 6-8 hours a day.

* Back problems
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: back-problems
   :END:

Another problem many office workers have are posture and back problems,
which can lead to chronic pain. Make sure your whole working environment
is set up in a way that does not slowly kill you.[fn:1]

A relativaly cheap solution I value very much are
[[https://www.amazon.com/AmazonBasics-Single-Monitor-Display-Mounting/dp/B00MIBN16O/][monitor
arms]], which are key to get both your monitor high enough to not to
have look down at it and also your desk low enough to not strain your
elbows and wrists while typing. An added bonus is the free space under
the monitor. I personally prefer the desk mounted ones for flexibility
reasons, and they also allow you to run the cables behind them, but wall
mounting is also an option that can come in handy.

Another big part of your setup is your chair. Many office chairs are bad
for your posture and do not support your lower back properly,
encouraging you to lounge instead of sitting upright. Good chairs can be
very expensive, the
[[http://www.kabseating.com/office/product.asp?product=204][KAB
Executive]] retails for way above $1000, but I'd go as far and say it is
worth that. I do not believe in saving money when it comes to my health.
Also it is going to last a decade or more without problems. But you
might not have this kind of money to spend on a chair, which I also
fully understand. All I want is to make you think about how you sit in
your chair, especially for long periods of intense concentration.

Another option can be a standing desk. There are many different ways of
doing things,
[[https://www.amazon.com/Adjustable-Height-Stand-Up-Desk-Monitor/dp/B00LNEB9KW/][fixed
height standing desks]],
[[https://www.amazon.com/LUXOR-Standup-CF48-DW-Stand-Crank-Adjustable/dp/B00PU6H5MA/][manually
variable desks]] and of course also
[[https://www.amazon.com/Electric-Stand-Up-Desk-Charcoal/dp/B00XLRJSAW/][electrically
operated ones]]. In addition to that, there are also
[[https://www.amazon.com/32-Wide-Standing-Desktop-Desk/dp/B015RXUV3U/][mini
add-on desks]] that you place on an existing desk. Standing makes it
easier to keep a proper posture (and also burns some additional
calories), but standing all day long is also bad for your back, so the
proper mix between sitting and standing is important.

There is one more point, and it is perhaps the most important one I have
to make: whatever you do, as an office worker on a desk, it is extremely
important to take regular breaks, get up (or sit down), stretch a bit,
go for a short walk. I would reccomend intervals of at most once per
hour, better twice. This is important for your cardiovascular system
(i.e. your heart), and can also help you think. Regular exercise of any
kind is also something everyone should do. Go to the gym, running or
ride a bicyle. Do something that makes you sweat two or three times a
week, and your overall quality of life will skyrocket.

[fn:1] #+CAPTION: Proper posture illustration
       [[http://www.metrophysicaltherapy.com/files/2014/02/workstation_426x418.jpg]]