---
title: Windows 10 - Post-Launch Thoughts
date: 2015-08-13
---

So it has been two weeks since the official Windows 10 launch, and there
have been a lot of discussions about it. I am going to summarize some of
my own thoughts, now that I had the chance to test it myself.

Windows 10 is the newest and
[[http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/11/windows-10-last-version-microsoft][supposedly
last version]] of the ever so popular operating system.
[[file:%7Bfilename%7D/thoughts-on-windows-10-and-free-software.md][I
have written before]] about my concerns regarding the continuing vendor
lock-in, especially DirectX, so I will try to not repeat myself.

From an end-user perspective, Windows 10 definitely feels better than
Windows 8, which was crippled by design, due to the focus on the Metro
view. Windows 10 brings back the "Start" menu, which I very much
appreciate. The desktop in and of itself feels okay-ish, but
[[https://imgur.com/a/ekRHU][lacks consistency in terms of UI style]].
It certainly feels unfinished, not only visually, but also technically.
On the test machine used, an all-in-one Dell with some 2.5 GHz quad core
and 12 GB of memory, almost every window opened was white for roughly a
second before it loaded, which makes the whole system feel really
unresponsive and unpolished.

But let us get to the real topic of discussion here, the obvious
surveillance "features". When Windows 10 launched, people saw the new
installer for the first time. The installer proudly promoted an "Express
Installation" and almost tried to hide the manual configuration,
[[https://jonathan.porta.codes/2015/07/30/windows-10-seems-to-have-some-scary-privacy-defaults/][which
almost exclusively contained privacy-related options]] that were all
defaulting to invading your personal space. I myself have written up
[[https://gist.github.com/sulami/7e74e3de7db372d38402][a small satirical
piece]] about it. Despite the majority of these options being hidden
away, especially after the installation, there are some options you
cannot even deactivate at all, like the
[[http://cdn.ghacks.net/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/telemetry.jpg][automatic
transmission of "diagnostic and usage data"]] (assuming you do not use
Enterprise Edition).

Yesterday, a Czech analyst found out that
[[https://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=cs&tl=en&u=http%3A%2F%2Faeronet.cz%2Fnews%2Fanalyza-windows-10-ve-svem-principu-jde-o-pouhy-terminal-na-sber-informaci-o-uzivateli-jeho-prstech-ocich-a-hlasu%2F][Windows
10 sends its keylogger logs home regularly]], as well as scraping your
drives after you search for movie names (what might be the thought
behind this, hmmm...), sending some 35 MB of encrypted data after using
the webcam for the first time (hmmm, again), and of course sending voice
data, even when deactivating Cortana entirely. The voice data alone
makes up about 80 MB every 15 minutes.

There have also been
[[http://arstechnica.co.uk/information-technology/2015/08/even-when-told-not-to-windows-10-just-cant-stop-talking-to-microsoft/][reports]],
that these calls home are hardcoded in such a way, that you cannot use
the (internal) firewall to block them, and they might leak your IP and
other sensitive data if you are using a VPN or Tor.

In the end, while I have no particular desire to use Windows at all,
with this developments, I do not know if I even feel save around a
Windows 10 machine anymore, let alone using one. Sadly, the average user
out there does not know anything about this (I imagine), and they will
be the ones violated. This is a nightmare, and I desperately hope that
Windows 10 will not catch on. Microsoft has shown its true nature, its
endgame, and it is bad. I do not think, anyone can trust them anymore,
at all.
